School education, and we're going to get to A&M
today. Tell me about your grade school education.
Well, it was all at Wheelock up through the 10th
grade. I'm sorry, through the 9th grade. The
little rural school at Wheelock was considered a
very good rural school. And I started in the first
grade and went through the ninth grade. And at the
time I graduated from the ninth grade, the 10th and
11th grade were transported to Franklin. That was
a change in the program. Prior to that time, you
could go to 10 grades at Wheelock. and then you had
to go to Hearn or Franklin or Bryan or somewhere to
get your 11th grade. It was not an accredited full
high school. But at the time, exactly the time I
graduated from the 9th grade, they started
transporting to Franklin by bus. So I went to
Franklin High School my 10th and 11th years and
graduated. The years at Wheelock were, looking
back on them now, very interesting. It was a... In
what way? Oh, enjoyable from the standpoint of we
had lots of competitive sports. We had some very,
very fine rural teachers.
I look back and wonder how in the world they ever put
up with all that bunch of people, but Our lower
grades of education were, I don't know, just
fascinating, really. I guess kiddos at that age
really don't know what to appreciate, but looking
back on it, I think we were very fortunate in the
type of school we had in the rural community. How
large was it?
I'd like to make some sort of an estimate. The
grades, of course, as they got further up, there
were less in the grades, but I would imagine there
were some...
Oh, I would suspect there were 150. 150 students in
the entire school? That would be my guess.
How large was in your graduating class?
See, I graduated from Franklin. Oh yeah, which was
how large, okay, how large was it? Franklin was a
pretty big school because they had, they brought
everybody in the whole, that part of the county. I
imagine they were 60 or 70 in the graduating class
at Franklin. Now our ninth grade class that would
have graduated in Wheelock probably had like 10 or
15, relatively small. In the elementary school,
what were your favorite subjects? Well, I always
got some fascination out of math. Math gave me no
problem, really.
I had less, I guess, fascination in English and the
various
grammars and this sort of thing. And we really
didn't have much of the sciences in that little
rural school. I didn't even get a chance to take
chemistry in high school. So really ours were all
just the basic courses. But I enjoyed my math
always. And you enjoyed it when you got into high
school too then? That's correct. That was your
favorite subject? All right, I'm sure it was. I
didn't, I found no difficulty in the math courses.
In fact, it's a really interesting thing,
and this goes back to a little interesting aspect,
too. My wife and I started in the first grade
together. Oh, really? She's from Poso. She's born
in Puso. We didn't really call ourselves
sweethearts until we got up in probably seventh or
eighth grade, but after we got into high school, of
course her favorite subjects were English and
grammar and Macbeth and all those things, and
she'd have difficulty with her math. I'd help her
with her math, she'd help me with English. So,
yeah, but math was no problem for me. Geometry,
trigonometry, all those things. And you had
trigonometry in high school then? No. But you had
algebra? Did you have algebra? We had algebra,
too. I guess algebra one and two, probably.
I don't think we had. We had geometry in high
school, I believe. No, you said trigonometry. No,
no, no trigonometry. No trigonometry. You
probably had geometry and algebra. I got
trigonometry in college, yeah. What were the
subjects you disliked the most? History.
Studying Macbeth and all these. these things
related to English. English literature, then.
Yeah, that's right. And it shouldn't have been. I
regret that because, you know, that's pretty
basic. But I'm told that's a shortcoming of most
engineers. Do you think that's true? A lot of them
I've seen. Could you explain the shortcoming? No,
I couldn't. Unless... unless it's difficult to
have an across-the-board interest in high school
subjects. And I guess, I don't know whether it's
math-inclined people migrate toward the
engineers or vice versa, but I just couldn't find
the interest in English and literature courses
Most of the girls did. What about when you got to A&M
in college? You had them. They were tough. And I
know it's just because I didn't apply myself to
them I'm sure because you know the things you're
interested in you work harder at. I was sure glad
when I got those things behind me in college. Now
I've heard that too and I teach a bunch of engineers
so what do you think about this idea that you find
that true well this is your interview no i don't
necessarily find that true but
uh do you think it really is i mean is this do you
think that's a general theme is that one of your
attitudes that you think that engineers do have
sort of a shortcoming when it comes to the liberal
arts well let me let me put it this way i have I have
run into so many engineers
who could not write a good letter and who could not
do too well at speaking. So I have just gone back to
my own dislike for the English and English
literature and things and thought they must have
really had sort of the same lack of interest that I
had. You know, I'm just surmising that, but I do
know that it's a sort of an accepted
fact that engineers do not do too well in writing
and being able to write and dictate letters and
this sort of thing. What type of student do you
think you were in high school, junior high school,
that age bracket? And this is not to be bragging,
but I was above average student I think. I can look
back and relate to my classmates and I think I was, I
probably was in the, well maybe the top 20% or
something.
Were you an outgoing student? Were you in a lot of
activities or what kind of activities? Well I took
part in all the sports and I declaimed several
years in the interscholastic league meets.
I had one or two extemporaneous speech courses and
some of that type thing. I took agriculture in high
school to get a little feel of the farm that I came
off of. So I didn't just take the things that I had to
take. I participated in a great many
extracurricular activities. Would you consider
yourself, looking back at high school now, would
you consider yourself being a person who was
popular in high school? Oh, yeah, I believe so. I
was, I know I was well thought of by the teachers.
Why is that? Why do you know? I mean, why did they
think well of you? Well, I think you know when they
do.
I've had, you know, I've known a lot of them in
subsequent years. Some of them came back to the
area to visit. Well, why did they like you? Maybe it
was because I was a good student. I don't know. And I
tried to get along with my fellow man. I did
participate in sports. I participated in things
that made them look good and made me look good. I
know I got along well with my... fellow students
because I was oh you know you'd play baseball and
used to choose sides you know I'd get chosen early
if you were going to take part in some of the
competitive sports so they would ask me to do
various things you know it I think I think you know
You know when you're an outcast, and you know also
when you're...
Later in life, of course, you became a leader. Were
you a leader in high school? Were you the president
of your student body, or anything like that, or a
leader of any clubs? Not really.
I tried to excel in what I did. I was not trying to be
on top of everything that came along, but anything
that I took part in, I tried to do a good job of
it. In the first place, we didn't have a lot of the
things that you mentioned in our school because it
was a little rural school, but we did have the
various things like the sport teams and the
reading and the math quizzes and spelling bees and
all these sort of things but not not really the
student bodies and all these sort of things
they're they're they've come along since that guy
but i uh i was uh oh i guess i was a sub leader i wasn't
one that always hung back and waited for everybody
else to do something When you graduated from high
school, it seems from what you've said that you had
firm aims and firm goals.
You were a graduate right in the midst of the
Depression. Did that worry you at all? No, it
really didn't because I- In other words, you were
an optimist. You were an optimist even though we
were in the middle of the Great Depression. Well,
actually I had never up to that time I had not I was
not the breadwinner I hadn't had to make my living
okay yeah all right so even though I knew a nickel
was hard to come by and I had worked some on
Saturdays in a little store there we'd have to make
a little change that I could call my own because my
dad If I asked him for a nickel, it'd be like asking
you for a thousand dollars. I remember asking him
one time, and he said, boy, if I had a nickel, I'd buy
some food with it. So he had it just that tight.
That's what he said to me. That's right, that's
what he said to me. And he made it. He would give me a
nickel, he'd have it to spare, but boy, a nickel at
that time was big money. And that seems, that's
hard for some of the young ones to realize. But
after my dad said, I'll give you a place to sleep,
I'll feed you, my mother made me a lunch. I took a
lunch every day I went to A&M. Carried it with me. He
said he'd give me food and a place to stay, and my
grandfather said, I'll let you use the car. I said,
all right, I'm going to school. I got this little
job on the campus making these $12 a month, and I
knew right then that I was gonna make it. If,
because if I hadn't showed up for that job sometime
there was four other people They wanted it. How'd
you get that job? Well, I lived poor. What was that?
Well, there was a fellow by the name of Hensling
that was head of the Landscape Art Department.
Hensel, Fritz Hensel.
H-E-N-S-E-L? That's right. Is that what the
street is named after? That's right. That's
right. He was head of the Landscape Department for
many years and my daddy's sister was a good friend
of his and worked somewhere out there at the
university and she told him that I was out there and
really needed a job and if he had anything that he
could provide that she knew that I'd appreciate it
and she would and I got a job. Of course I had applied
and Tell them how much I did need it, but I had a
little help. I didn't just walk into it because,
I'm not kidding you, there were six people for
every job.
In other words, would you consider your family
impoverished during the Depression?
Probably not in the term that you're describing
it. We never did. Poor? Oh, yes. They were poor. But
people that lived on the farm were in better shape
than people who didn't live on the farm because we
killed our own beef, and that didn't really cost us
anything because they ate the grass on the land. We
had a garden. We raised our potatoes. We had to buy
beans and flour. We ground our own corn and raised
it. They bought coffee. And that's about it. So we
were never, we were never without something to
eat. But we didn't have anything to go to the
picture show. We didn't have anything to, you
know, spend foolishly at all. We had the clothes we
needed. Sometimes they had a lot of patches on
them. But we were not, even in the sense of some
people today that are poverty-stricken, we were
not, but we were poor. How did the Depression and
any of the New Deal programs, like the CCCs or the
WPA, did they, did anyone in your family apply for
any of those? Did my immediate family? No. How
about any of your relatives, were any of those
people helped? through any of the New Deal
programs? Oh, I'm sure there were. Right off, I'm
not, you know, I couldn't pinpoint which one, but
not my immediate family. Now, we were, I'm sure we
got some of the agriculture assistance,
whatever, but I don't specifically remember. We
had a farm, and we were, even though some of it was
self-reported. That's correct. but like the CCC
and I was I was real familiar with that and I don't
know of any of our people that did. Of course I was
not a candidate because I was going to start
school. Now you still had sharecroppers on the
farm at this time. That's right. How were they
getting along? Well they had it tough too and I'm
sure there were a good many of them that my father
and grandfather would provide this food for and at
the end of the year they didn't have enough to pay
for it I expect, so I'm sure they owed them money
that they never got, but they had it of course
tougher than we, but it was an experience. Did you
ever, when you were growing up, did you ever go out
to any of the sharecropper cabins and talk to any of
them? Oh yeah, lots of times. In fact, we had a
colored lady that lived in the backyard. She had a
house that worked for my grandfather. It was as
best I could relate back to his almost like slave
times. She lived right there in that house. She
worked for him and his wife was an invalid for many
years and she cooked and cleaned up and kept the
house and did whatever needed to be done and lived
right there in the yard in a log cabin. Many, many
nights we'd go out and lay on her porch and talk to
her and let her, she'd entertain us and jack with us
and run us off when she got tired of us. You know,
this type of thing. But we, gosh, we visited those
folks and built the field and worked, you know, a
little bit with them, pick a little cotton. Didn't
have to, but did and just, and we learned a great
deal about them. We went swimming with them. I
mean, we, there's, The big ol' boys would take us
swimming and just have the creek get run through
the place. So we were very close to them. You said
you learned a great deal from them. What did you
learn? Could you be a little bit more specific?
Well, some of the basic things, lots of, I guess
you'd say lots of philosophies of poor people. I
think that's a learning process.
You saw a complete different lifestyle that we
lived. You saw a complete different philosophy of
life. They, I don't think they ever expected to
have anything much. But they had a family and they
had a somewhat of closeness that was different
than ours. So I learned a lot of I guess I'd say I
learned a lot of things that I'm glad I didn't have.
I learned a lot of things that you see people that
are real close to the soil and real close to are a
long way from being the educational levels that we
had and I think it gave you more of an appreciation
of what you had and were. So this is the kind of
things I think we learned. Getting back to the
Great Depression for a minute, for a minute, did
this, did the Depression and the New Deal affect
your thinking about politics? Did you ever
discuss politics? Not really. You didn't discuss
politics with your father or anything? What
political persuasion was he? Oh, he, I guess you'd
say, I don't guess he ever voted anything but
Democratic, but I don't think he's one of these
that said, you know, I'm a Democrat, my
grandfather's a Democrat. That was just sort of
the philosophy of the land man. But of course he
died in 1952, so that wasn't long after Roosevelt
had died, so he didn't have an opportunity to vote
for others very much. But he was a Roosevelt man
basically? Oh yeah, I'm sure he was. But I expect,
and I don't know about my grandfather because I was
not really old enough to think about politics and
besides that, you know, we had very limited radio.
We had a radio. Did you have any electricity on it
back in the 30s? From 1936. You did after 36. I
started A&M studying by kerosene lamp. And after
36, the Bryan REA went through the area. But up
until that time, we did not have electricity. But I
studied my freshman year in Amherst. You can do it.
I didn't know any better. There's a well. That's
right. I had to have a life. And that was it. They had
had some ingenious lighting adaptations.
Somebody
sold them over years ago on a carbide lighting
system. They had a big pit in the ground where this
carbide dripped, I mean, dropped into water. It
was an automatic system that carbide would drop
into the water and make gas just like carbide is
made now and then it was piped into the houses in a
little small pipe and it actually burned and they
had it mounted just like a light and you'd strike a
match to it and the little carbide was burned made a
beautiful little light it was pretty expensive to
operate but that was a sort of ingenious system but
although we didn't have electricity, we had a nice
refrigerator that ran off kerosene, it was
Cervell, they were one of the early makers. So
it's, I've seen lots of changes for the good. If you
had to summarize those early years before you went
off to hand out, summarize the themes of those
years, how would you do that?
Oh I'm really what uh what vein are you thinking or I
mean what uh well what were the important things in
your early years? I haven't
really thought about that of course uh looking
back on it I can think of a lot of things that are
important I like the Growing up on the farm was
important. I think it gave me a lot of basic roots
that I wouldn't take far. The chores that we had to
do. Of course my graduating, being able to
graduate from high school with
reasonably high honors, which gave me a lot of
satisfaction. The fact that my father and mother
were able to raise all of us and come through the
Depression without some sort of total collapse, I
think I was grateful for.
The years that I look back on this experience of
highway building that were early with me, I still
have a great interest in those years those teams
pulling those scrapers watching drive piling for
bridges with a big old hammer that they'd pull up
and turn it loose and drop it you know nowadays they
got steam and electricity
that type of looking back is really interesting to
me. But probably the highlight was my being
accepted to A&M as a freshman student
over lots of turmoils and lots of things. I got the
letter saying I was accepted and I was really
excited. I know that you didn't have the money
probably to go any other place, but did you ever
consider any other alternatives besides A&M? No.
It was basically then a question of this is a good
engineering school and also finances. That's
right. Those were considerations then? Well, of
course.
and and I never I never even thought about any other
but looking back as of now I don't believe I would
have been interested in going anywhere else
anyhow. Why not? Well it's just my dad had had taken
me many times to the campus by for livestock you
know take him to the vet school sure there were no
veterinarians he had to have anything like that
done with the vet school I used to go to horse shows
with him out there they used to have horse shows
where they had trotters and saddle gates and all
this and the school just fascinated me the
physical layout was interesting and of course I'd
never been to others I mean I had seen them but I'm
not sure I would have been interested in going
anywhere else but those two things engineering
and of course the financial ability to go there and
nowhere else. Now you're a brigadier general did
you ever consider West Point or any service school
and in other words in your decision to go to college
there was there was no thought about the military
that did not come into your Other than the fact that
I was I was truly interested in ROTC. I got I got I had
a lot of interest in ROTC and I think if it had been
optional at the time I went I'd have taken it. It was
not but I think I would have taken it. Okay let's
talk about the Corps. Do you remember your first
impressions of the Corps? Yeah uh I And I guess this
is the first thing I thought. Of course, the people
I ran into were more juniors and seniors than
anybody else because I was a day student. And
mainly my association with the Corps was on drill
days. But I remember the first thinking was, gosh,
I don't know how they learned all this stuff. And
here I don't know anything about it. And I felt
lost, you know, because I drill twice a week. And
that was, of course, with the military with what we
call the bull tags, you know, the military
classroom work we had once a week, twice,
whatever. But my first impression with it was, you
know, maybe I did the right thing, maybe I didn't. I
don't know whether I'll ever learn what all these
juniors and seniors know about military and the
like, but that kind of thing comes around pretty
quickly. But I did, I enjoyed it. I liked to wear the
uniform. That intrigued me from the very
beginning. Why? I don't know.
I like to have my uniform clean. I like for it to be
dressy looking and there was just something about
a uniform to me that made you feel like you're one of
them. You were like a lot of other people and I have
always liked
group action.